# Special Instructions

The basic premise is; if the blockchain is the computer, then
`iroha_client_cli` or any of the client libraries for that matter, are the
keyboard, the blockchain is the hard drive, and the Iroha peer software is
the processor. Like a processor, Iroha accepts portable instructions which
modify what's written to the blockchain, allow certain users to use the
network, and lock others out.

As such any operation that is run on-chain is written in terms of Iroha
Special Instructions (ISI), and there is no other way of modifying the
world state that would pass consensus. To understand why, we'll need to
make a short detour into how Iroha is implemented under the hood.

Each interaction with the blockchain is done via a _transaction_. It's a
collection of instructions, either glued together in sequence or called
from a WASM blob (more on that later), that can register an account, remove
an account, add X amount of Y currency etc. There are also queries, which
return some values that you are allowed to access, which are also
instructions. Each time you send a transaction to Iroha, it gets put into a
queue, and when the time comes, the queue is emptied, and the consensus
process begins. This process is a bit of mundane with a bit of black
magic[^1]. The mundane aspect is that a special set of peers needs to take
the transaction queue, and reproduce the same world state. If the world
state cannot be reproduced for some reason or another, none of the
transactions get committed to a block and consensus tries again. The
reasoning behind this algorithm is simple: if someone had some evil peers
and connected them to the existing network, if they tried to fake data,
some good™ peers would not get the same (evil™) world state. If that's the
case, the evil™ peers would not be allowed to participate in consensus, and
you would eventually produce a block using only good™ peers. So if any
changes to the world state are made without using ISI, they would not pass
consensus and never get committed to a block.

## Iroha Special Instructions

So what kinds of ISI do we have? If you've read the tutorial on Rust or
Python, you've already seen a couple of instructions: `Register<Account>`
and `Mint<Quantity>`. For the exhaustive list of Instructions you should
probably consult our source code, however, here are some important classes.

### (Un)Register

Instructions used to give an ID to a new entity on the blockchain.
Everything that can be registered is `Identifiable`, but not everything
that's `Identifiable` can be registered. As a rule, everything that can be
registered, can also be un-registered, but that is not a hard and fast
rule.

You can register a new account, a new asset definition, a peer, and a
trigger (more on them later). Registering a peer is currently the only way
of adding peers that were not part of the original `TRUSTED_PEERS` array to
the network.

Registering an account is different. Iroha can be compiled in two modes:
_public_ and _private_. If it's compiled with _private_ permissions, to
register an account, you need an account. This is the default. If you want
your users to be able to register without access to a pre-existing account,
you need to compile Iroha in the _public_ mode.

::: info

As of writing, the set of public blockchain permissions is incomplete, and
as such Iroha source code needs to be modified to run it in the _public_
mode.

:::

### Mint/Burn

Can refer to assets, trigger uses (if the trigger has a limited number of
repetitions), as well as temporary permission tokens. Some assets can be
declared as non-mintable, meaning that any attempt to mint them
post-registration will result in an error.

::: info

This will be changed in RC3.

:::

Assets and permissions tokens need to be minted to a specific account,
usually the one that registered the asset in the first place. All assets
are assumed to be non-negative as well, so you can never have `-1.0` of
`time` or `Burn` a negative amount and get a `Mint`.

### Grant/Revoke

These are used specifically for permissions. When minting a permission
token, a user is granted `X` amount of permissions to do `Y` which will
expire once all `X` operations were performed. By contrast, a `Grant`
operation can be used to grant either a single permission, or a group of
permissions (or a "role"), to a user permanently. As such these
instructions should be used carefully.

### SetKeyValue/RemoveKeyValue

These instructions are used with the key/value store asset type. This use
case has not received much attention so far, because storing data in the
blockchain is rather advanced topic that we shall cover separately.

### Query

These are all the queries that can be made from the client side. This is
not necessarily the only kind of information that is available on the
network, but it's the only kind of information that is guaranteed to be
accessible on all networks. Telemetry data is optional to the specific
deployment of Iroha. Access to your account balance is required function.

Learn more about [queries](queries.md).

### Expressions, Conditionals, Logic

All ISI operate on expressions. Each expression has an `EvaluatesTo` which
is used in instruction execution. While you could specify the account name
directly, you could also specify the account ID via some mathematical or
string operation. You can check if an account is registered on the
blockchain too.

Using expressions which implement `EvaluatesTo<bool>`, you can set up
conditional logic and execute more sophisticated operations on-chain. For
example, you can submit a `Mint` instruction only if a specific account is
registered. Recall that you can combine this with queries, and as such can
program the blockchain to do some amazing stuff. This stuff is what we
refer to as _smart contracts_, and is the main defining feature of advanced
usage of blockchain technology.
